Computational Analytics for Analysis and Management of Atmospheric Radiation Data

Co-Principal Investigator: 
Michael A. Langston, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Tennessee 

Abstract: 

The ARM Climate Research Facility is managed to ensure it fulfills its mission to provide observation data to improve the understanding of climate processes and the representation of those processes in climate models. This mission is fulfilled by operating atmospheric observatories around the world that collect massive amounts of atmospheric measurements to provide data products that help scientists study the effects and interactions of clouds and aerosols and their impact on the earth’s energy balance. In addition, computing resources and analytical tools are provided to facilitate the application of ARM measurements to pressing science issues. However, the atmospheric radiation data collected may not be correct due to an instrument failure or other factors. Thus a computational analytics tool for these huge data to dectect the anomalies is nesscesary which is the main goal of this project to deliver the correct data products to consumers. Two kinds of pearson correlations are calculated. Correlations between variables of the same instrument are first computed for a whole year and repeated for other years. Then, correlations of one variable among multiple instruments in the same area are computed for a whole year and repeated for other years. These correlations work as a base knowledge. Graph algorithms and other statistical methods are applied on these correlations to detect the flaws in these massive datasets. Besides, this project may also help to find undiscovered phenomena which is not a anomaly in the data.

Research Partners: 
The PI for this project is Jitendra Kumar at ORNL. 
Yuping Lu, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Tennessee 

Relevant Sites of Interest: 
ARM Climate Research Facility https://www.arm.gov/
